Standardized Placental Pathology Reporting: Improving Quality and Clinical Utility
Recommendations from the Society for Pediatric Pathology Placental Pathology Reporting Task Force


Introduction
Placental pathology reports are read and interpreted by a diverse audience, including, but not limited to, obstetric providers, neonatologists, primary care physicians, patients, lawyers and other pathologists. These reports are instrumental in decisions made by families regarding whether to pursue additional pregnancies, and by clinicians on how to manage those pregnancies, immediate neonatal and long-term pediatric care, as well as for quality assurance.1 While the Amsterdam consensus2 provided an overall framework for categorizing placental pathology and standardized definitions, there is currently no standardization in reporting of placental pathology. Several methods of synoptic reporting have been proposed.3-6 Others likely exist at the individual institutional level. However, none have yet achieved widespread adoption.
       In addition, the reality of the practice of placental pathology in the United States is such that the majority of placentas are interpreted and reported by general or gynecologic pathologists, not otherwise trained in perinatal and placental pathology. There is an insufficient number of subspecialty-trained perinatal pathologists to meet the volume and geographic breadth of deliveries requiring expertise in placental pathology. There is also a dichotomy between the quality and degree of detail that is found in reports from subspecialty trained perinatal pathologists and non-subspecialty trained pathologists.7 There is a tendency for the subspecialists to continue to refine details of diagnostic criteria in a vacuum, while the majority of placental pathology reports fail to accurately report even basic, well-aligned consensus diagnoses, in a clear, meaningful and clinically useful way. This tendency has been noted by patient advocacy groups, and there is a concerted desire and push by these groups, as well as by obstetric and neonatal care providers and pathologists, to improve the quality of placental pathology reporting.8 Much of this advocacy has its roots in the push to standardize reporting of placental findings in the setting of stillbirth, but wider application of such standardization to all placentas sent for pathologic examination would be optimal.
       To address this growing need for standardization of placental pathology reports, a multidisciplinary Placental Pathology Reporting Task Force was created by the Society for Pediatric Pathology, and tasked with developing a recommended placental pathology reporting template. The following describes the consensus template that was formulated, including recommended and optional elements, specific diagnostic verbiage and recommended comments, all designed to maximize clinical relevance and ease of reporting in a succinct format, while maintaining adherence to the Amsterdam consensus definitions.2 We endorse this template as a tool for both subspecialty-trained and general-practice pathologists to improve the quality and clinical value of placental pathology reports.

Methods
Practicing perinatal and placental pathologists, representing both subspecialized academic and general practice settings, were invited by the Society for Pediatric Pathology Perinatal Subcommittee to participate in a task force on standardizing placental pathology reporting. The mission of the task force was to develop a standardized reporting template that (1) is comprehensive and detailed enough to capture the nuances of placental pathology and its clinical contexts; (2) highlights findings that are clinically relevant or actionable; (3) translates findings into clear language that can be widely understood by clinicians, and serves as a foundation for discussions between clinicians and their patients; and (4) is succinct yet specific, ensuring it is practical for use by general pathologists. The task force was convened in June 2024 and has met monthly since then, over the course of one year. All task force members contributed equally to the construction of the template. Multiple task force members submitted their current institutional and personal report formats, templates and comments, and the task force leader (SR) generated a preliminary draft template based on those submissions. The final template was generated by systematic group discussion and consensus. In the latter phase of this process, members representing maternal-fetal medicine, general obstetrics and gynecology, neonatology and patient advocacy groups were recruited by the task force members, and their input was integrated into the template. 
       The task force adhered to the Amsterdam consensus definitions2 when generating the template. For categories of placental pathology that are not addressed by the existing Amsterdam consensus, the task force members reviewed the current literature on each topic and arrived at the template definitions by consensus.

Results
Template Formatting
Multiple template formats were proposed and discussed. Initial proposals involved modeling the template after the existing cancer protocol templates produced by the College of American Pathologists. Considered alongside this model was the proposal to use a checklist-style template, which could potentially be uploaded to a web-based tool5 or integrated into hospital laboratory information systems (LIS). Alternate formats considered included outline-style and table-style documents which could be viewed electronically or printed and kept as an at-the-scope reference. Additional considerations included following a disease-based format, an anatomical compartment-based format, or a hybrid of both. After discussion, it was determined that while checklist-style templates perform well for cancer reporting, given the volume of placentas processed on a daily basis in many laboratories, and the length of the reports often generated by these templates, this style was ultimately considered to be too unwieldy for use in daily practice, especially for a busy general surgical pathologist. The task force ultimately elected to adopt a disease-based, table style format. This approach provides individual pathologists with the flexibility to structure their reports in the manner that best suits their practice and their clinical audience, whether it be narrative reporting, synoptic reporting, or a combination of both. In addition, pathologists can use this document to create their own modified templates and quick reference phrases in their individual LIS, to allow for easy utilization. It should be noted that this template is intended to serve not as a “ceiling”, but rather as a “floor”, designed to set an achievable minimum standard for placental pathology reporting, without restricting those who wish to provide more detailed information. 
       A general reporting structure was adopted, which includes a “top line” diagnostic category (denoted in the template with a “—“), with supporting specific histologic findings listed below each category.9 Importantly, not all placentas will have lesions that require a categorical top line; in fact, in routine practice, most placentas do not fall neatly into one diagnostic category. In these situations, it is recommended that individual diagnoses be listed as separate lines, ordered according to severity at the discretion of the pathologist. In addition, other histologic findings that do not fall under a particular diagnostic category should be listed as separate line diagnoses.
       The template is presented in its entirety in Table 1, and an example report generated by the template in Figure 1. The following sections will provide additional notes and detail, outline the various report components and categories of placental lesions, and present the consensus recommendations for formatting, verbiage, and definitions for those lesions that are not covered in the Amsterdam consensus statement.2
Header
While no specific formatting or verbiage was endorsed for the report header, the following elements are recommended to be included: gestational age, placental weight, percentile or weight range (at the minimum for those that are less than 10th percentile or greater than 90th percentile), and completeness of the maternal surface, if noted to be incomplete at the time of gross examination. Additional optional elements include mode of delivery, appropriateness of weight for placentas that fall into the normal range, and degree of histologic maturation. Weight percentiles should be included when abnormal to the greatest degree of detail as can be provided by the reference tables being utilized by the pathologist’s institution,10-12 as the patient advocate members of the Task Force stated this information is particularly valued by patients when reviewing their reports. 
Significant Gross Findings
Significant gross findings should be included in the main body of the placenta report when present, although the location within the report and exact verbiage are not specified. Significant findings include succenturiate/accessory lobe, abnormal cord insertion (at the minimum marginal and velamentous cord insertions; peripheral insertion is optional,13 single umbilical artery, and umbilical cord abnormalities that are associated with fetal vascular malperfusion, including long cord, hypercoiled cord, and true knots.14 Hypocoiled umbilical cord may also be optionally reported.15 If histologic findings consistent with fetal vascular malperfusion are also noted, these gross findings may be included as supporting elements under the fetal vascular malperfusion diagnostic line; otherwise they may be listed separately as stand-alone diagnoses.
Acute chorioamnionitis
The term “acute chorioamnionitis” is preferred over terms such as “ascending intrauterine infection” and “amniotic fluid infection”, unless documentation of infection by a specific organism is available. Acute chorioamnionitis should be staged and graded in accordance with previously published criteria (Table 2).16 The task force recognized some controversy and lack of clarity in the staging of acute subchorionitis, with the Amsterdam criteria including acute subchorionitis in stage 1, and a recent textbook defining it as stage 0.17 While the task force recognized that acute subchorionitis is by definition not acute chorioamnionitis, it is noted to be a lesion of significance within the spectrum of maternal inflammatory response, and should be reported regardless of which grading schema is chosen. Future revisions to the Amsterdam criteria present a vital opportunity to revisit and thoughtfully reassess this subject, with corresponding modifications to the template to ensure alignment. In addition to the grade and stage, a descriptive diagnosis is recommended to be included, to aid in the ease of report interpretation by patients and clinicians who may not be familiar with the grading and staging system. This descriptive diagnosis should include the localization of inflammation in the maternal and fetal inflammatory compartments, and include severity if grade 2 inflammation is present. The presence of bacteria may be mentioned if applicable, along with Gram stain and GMS stain results, if performed. In the event that a placenta is sent for intra-amniotic infection and no chorioamnionitis is identified, a comment should be included in the report noting the lack of significant acute inflammation. 
Chronic Inflammatory Lesions
Considerable discussion was devoted to the appropriate verbiage for chronic inflammatory lesions. Chronic inflammatory lesions are most commonly immune mediated, and less commonly infectious. While the Amsterdam consensus and much of the literature uses the term “villitis of unknown etiology”, some task force members were concerned that this term implies that exclusion of infectious etiologies was performed. While there are histologic findings that may suggest infectious versus non-infectious villitis,18-19 routine immunohistochemical staining to exclude infectious organisms is not recommended, especially in the absence of any histologic findings to suggest it. Therefore, the preferred terminology to be used for this category is “chronic inflammatory lesions”, while the term “villitis of unknown etiology” can be used if additional workup was performed to exclude infectious etiologies. Chronic villitis should be graded as high or low grade with the focality or distribution also described, following the Amsterdam consensus criteria (Table 3).2 Other diagnostic entities falling under this header include basal chronic villitis, chronic chorioamnionitis, lymphoplasmacytic deciduitis/plasma cell deciduitis (either term is acceptable), eosinophilic/T-cell chorionic vasculitis20 and chorionic histiocytic hyperplasia.21-22 The diagnosis of lymphoplasmacytic deciduitis should be reserved for those cases with definitive plasma cells, or diffuse chronic inflammation.23
       Several comments were recommended for this diagnostic category. Given that chronic villitis, particularly when multifocal or associated with fetal vascular obliteration or perivillous fibrin deposition is associated with an increased risk of adverse outcomes and recurrence in subsequent pregnancies, a comment reflecting this is recommended. The recommended comment provided in the template can be modified by the individual pathologist according to situation and institutional preferences. As previously mentioned, certain histologic features such as plasma cells within villous stroma are suggestive of infectious etiologies for chronic villitis.18 In these cases, immunohistochemical stains should be performed to exclude these infections as appropriate depending on the morphologic pattern observed on H&E staining.19 If these stains are negative and concern for infectious villitis persists, this should be reported in a comment, and the clinician contacted to discuss the case. Correlation with serologic testing of the mother or PCR testing of the neonate can also be helpful. Finally, a comment is recommended to be included when diagnosing eosinophilic/T-cell chorionic vasculitis, given its current status as a poorly understood phenomenon and lack of association with adverse fetal outcomes.20
Maternal Vascular Malperfusion
Maternal vascular malperfusion (MVM) is generally well-characterized and has been well-reviewed in the literature.24-25 Although some investigators have proposed or utilized a grading system for MVM,5 the task force elected to maintain the method of reporting endorsed by the Amsterdam consensus. Diagnoses falling under the header of MVM include accelerated villous maturation, distal villous hypoplasia, villous agglutination, villous infarct, villous infarction hematoma and decidual arteriopathy. While increased syncytial knots and focally increased perivillous/intervillous fibrin are recognized features associated with MVM, both are recommended to be reported under the broader category of accelerated villous maturation. In accordance with the Amsterdam consensus, reporting membranous laminar decidual necrosis and chorion laeve pseudocysts is considered optional. If villous infarcts or infarction hematomas are multiple or extensive, additional information regarding size and extent is recommended to be included in the diagnosis. In addition, if findings consistent with abruption are seen in the context of MVM, these findings should be placed under the header of MVM. If seen without additional findings to suggest MVM, abruption should be listed separately (see below).
Fetal Vascular Malperfusion
Like MVM, fetal vascular malperfusion (FVM) is well-described in the literature.26 The task force recommended maintaining the grading system endorsed by the Amsterdam classification. In addition, the inclusion of gross findings that are supportive of the diagnosis of FVM is recommended under the FVM diagnostic header, such as umbilical cord lesions at risk (Table 4). Of note, the task force recommended not including vascular ectasia in the template, given its questionable relevance as an isolated lesion, and the high risk for overdiagnosis, particularly in formalin-fixed placentas, as are often seen in general surgical pathology practices.27 In addition, while increased circulating fetal nucleated red blood cells are often associated with FVM, they are recommended to be reported separately, since they are not specific to FVM.
Acute Abruption
The major pathologic findings of acute abruption are retroplacental hematoma, with or without parenchymal compression and villous infarction, and/or intravillous hemorrhage. In general, loosely attached blood clots on the maternal surface of the placenta in isolation, particularly in the absence of clinical evidence of abruption, should not be considered evidence of abruption. The specific histologic findings seen in the placenta should be listed as supporting features for the diagnosis. Abruption can be classified by acuity and location. For simplicity, the task force recommended that acute central, acute marginal, and subacute central abruption all be subsumed under the header of acute abruption. Chronic marginal abruption is a separate diagnosis (see below). As mentioned in the Amsterdam consensus, placental abruption is a clinical diagnosis, and when it occurs immediately prior to delivery, it may not leave any placental pathologic evidence. To that end, a comment reflecting this is recommended in cases where a placenta is sent for abruption but no supporting findings are seen on pathologic examination. At the same time, abruption can also sometimes be diagnosed on pathologic examination without known prior clinical suspicion, and noting these histologic findings in the report is valuable to clinicians. Finally, as previously mentioned, if findings consistent with acute abruption are seen in the context of MVM, these findings should be placed under the header of MVM,2 and the acute abruption described as occurring in the setting of MVM.
Chronic Marginal Abruption
Three major pathologic findings were noted as supportive of the diagnosis of chronic marginal abruption: circumvallate membrane insertion, remote marginal retroplacental hematoma, and chorioamniotic hemosiderosis.28-29 The task force determined that two of these three criteria are needed to utilize the header of chronic marginal abruption. If only one of these findings is present, it should be listed as a separate, isolated diagnosis. In addition, the task force noted that circumvallate membrane insertion is the least meaningful of these diagnoses, and may not need to be mentioned in the final diagnosis if it is the only finding, although it should still be mentioned in the gross description. The term “remote marginal retroplacental hematoma” refers to organized/layered and adhered blood clot/fibrin at the margin of the placenta. The entity sometimes referred to as “chronic central abruption” is reclassified here as a type of subacute abruption. At times there can be diagnostic challenges when differentiating hemosiderin from meconium in pigment laden macrophages in the membranes or chorionic plate; an iron stain can be used in this context to aid in the differentiation. 
Basal Plate Myometrial Fibers
Basal plate myometrial fibers (BPMF) is a relatively recent diagnostic term that was proposed and reviewed in detail by an expert panel, as part of the Placenta Accreta Spectrum of disorders (PAS).30 The task force agreed to follow the expert panel’s recommendations for diagnosing and staging basal plate myometrial fibers, and a comment in alignment with this recommendation is provided in the template. Due to the relative novelty of the recommendation, inclusion of a reference to the original paper is also suggested. In addition, a comment is recommended to be included for placentas that have been submitted for suspected PAS, but that do not have any identifiable BPMF. While BPMF may help confirm clinically suspected PAS, particularly when stage 2 (absence of decidua), BPMF in the delivered placenta may not always predict the presence of placenta accreta. Since BPMF can only be stage 1 or 2 in delivered placentas and PAS can only be graded in hysterectomy specimens, the latter diagnoses are not included in this template.
Increased Fetal Nucleated Red Blood Cells
Increased circulating fetal nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs) is a non-specific finding generally associated with fetal stress and/or chronic anemia. It is also associated with prolonged maternal hyperglycemia, usually in the setting of diabetes.31 NRBC counts are usually expressed as ratio of the number of nucleated red cells relative to 100 white blood cells, and various thresholds for defining an increased number have been described in the literature.32-33 However, for simplicity in everyday practice, the task force recommended following a guideline of defining increased NRBC as at least one NRBC per 40x field in fetal capillaries. This methodology is simple to carry out, and a threshold of 10 NRBCs per 10 high power fields has been shown to correlate to an absolute neonatal NRBC count of at least 2.5 x 103/mm3.34 The task force suggested that this technique may be further simplified to rule out increased NRBCs if no NRBCs are seen in the distal fetal capillaries in three 40x fields. While more proximal vessels may be used to screen for increased NRBCs, they should not be used for final assessment in most routine cases. Correlation with the neonatal complete blood count values is recommended if there is an equivocal or borderline increase in NRBCs, as this observation may not be clinically significant. A minimum gestational age of 22 weeks was recommended for this diagnostic cutoff, as higher numbers of NRBCs may be normal at younger gestational ages.35 
Intervillous Thrombus
Intervillous thrombi are laminated space occupying lesions in the intervillous space. They “push” the surrounding villi away, usually with only limited associated villous damage. In contrast to subchorionic thrombi, which are generally considered to be clinically insignificant, due to their near ubiquity, intervillous thrombi are located in the center of the parenchyma or at the basal plate. They are listed as a standalone diagnosis in reports. Although evidence of their relationship to feto-maternal hemorrhage is mixed, multiple, fresh intervillous thrombi may be supportive of fetomaternal hemorrhage, in the appropriate clinical context and Kleihauer-Betke test result36-37; this may be mentioned in a comment in the appropriate clinical scenario. 
Patchy villous edema
Villous edema takes two microscopic forms which may occur together: “Swiss cheese-like” spaces, with floating Hofbauer cells, and/or lifting of the syncytiotrophoblast off the villous stroma, both of which generally involve the proximal villous tree, including stem villi and immature intermediate villi. Patchy villous edema is overall non-specific, and can been seen in association with any acute hypoxic injury.38-39 It is listed as a standalone diagnosis in reports.
Diffuse villous edema
Diffuse villous edema (hydrops placentalis) is microscopically similar to patchy villous edema. It involves both proximal and distal villi, and may be seen at younger gestational ages. It is usually associated with hydrops fetalis, which has a litany of associated pathologies, some of which are visible in the placenta and can be grouped with the diagnosis.40 The diagnosis of diffuse villous edema should generally be limited to those cases in which there is appropriate clinical context.
Meconium
Placental findings consistent with meconium effects include a spectrum of gross and microscopic findings that vary based on the length of exposure.41-42 Gross findings include green staining of the membranes, chorionic plate and umbilical cord. Microscopic findings include reactive changes in amniocytes, loose meconium on the membranes, and the presence of meconium-laden macrophages in the free membranes, progressing to the chorionic plate stroma and umbilical cord, and finally, meconium-associated vascular necrosis (MAVN).43 MAVN in particular is associated with adverse perinatal outcomes; therefore the task force recommends the pathologist include a comment in the report, and consider contacting the neonatal intensive care unit or pediatrician when making this diagnosis. Fetal vasculitis in the chorionic plate or umbilical cord may be seen in association with meconium, and this finding may be reported under the meconium header. However, when seen without meconium, isolated fetal vasculitis may represent unsampled chorioamnionitis, and in this situation, it can be reported under the acute chorioamnionitis header. While it is recommended to provide objective reporting of these gross and microscopic findings, attempting to provide a translation of these findings to an estimated timing of meconium exposure is not recommended, as it can be inflammatory and litigious. For this reason, the task force also recommends that in the absence of MAVN, the phrase “consistent with meconium” should not be used when noting pigment laden macrophages, unless there is a documented clinical history of meconium-stained fluid. This recommendation reflects the fact that mimics of meconium-laden macrophages do exist, including hemosiderin and other pigments such as lipofuscin.41 
Villous capillary lesions
The task force elected to limit the template to the most common villous capillary lesions: chorangiosis, chorangiomatosis and chorangioma.44 Chorangiosis is commonly defined using the “rule of 10’s” as per Altshuler45: more than 10 capillaries per villus in 10 or more distal villi in several regions of the placenta. Practically speaking, the task force members acknowledged that most experts do not always strictly count villous cross sections when evaluating placentas. If villi with 20+ capillary profiles are seen, chorangiosis is most likely present. Chorangiomatosis (also termed multifocal chorangiomatosis) is defined as multiple foci of stem or immature intermediate villi with an anastomosing network of small vessels at the margins, with surrounding pericytes and stromal cells. These foci are poorly circumscribed and are distributed throughout the placenta. Chorangioma is a benign, nodular vascular lesion, usually located under the chorionic plate or at the margins of the placenta. Reporting the maximum dimension may be helpful for distinguishing larger chorangiomas, which are more likely to be clinically significant, from those that are microscopic, incidental findings.
Perivillous fibrin
Patchy or marginal perivillous fibrin, in moderation, is nearly ubiquitous in every third trimester placenta. Deposition in early gestations or markedly increased perivillous fibrin in the third trimester placenta is a pathologic feature that needs to be reported. Increased perivillous fibrin deposition patterns are best assessed on gross examination of the placenta. Perivillous fibrin is recommended to be reported using the system proposed by Katzman and Genest.46 Briefly, less than 25% involvement of the placenta by perivillous fibrin is termed focally increased perivillous fibrin (often included as part of a diagnosis of accelerated villous maturation, in association with MVM), or perivillous fibrin plaque if more localized. 25-50% involvement is termed borderline massive perivillous fibrin deposition (MPVFD), and greater than 50% involvement is massive perivillous fibrin deposition. In addition, the presence of a band of fibrin encasing the entire basal plate which is greater than or equal to 3 mm in thickness on at least one slide is defined as maternal floor infarction (MFI). Before making the diagnosis of MPVFD, review of the gross specimen is recommended, to ensure that 50% of the placenta is involved, and that the histologic sections are truly representative of the placenta as a whole. Both MPVFD and MFI are lesions with a high risk of recurrence and with significant associated perinatal morbidity, and a comment is recommended to accompany these diagnoses. Inclusion of this comment with borderline MPVFD is at the pathologist’s discretion, depending on the specific clinical scenario and pattern of perivillous fibrin deposition. Of note, this finding has also been increasingly described in association with various infectious etiologies, including in association with SARS-CoV-2 placentitis.47 This optional section of the comment should be included in the appropriate clinical scenario, as the increased risk of recurrence seen in non-infectious MPVFD may not apply to infectious cases.48
Chronic histiocytic intervillositis
Chronic histiocytic intervillositis (CHI) is defined as a patchy to diffuse infiltration of monocyte macrophages involving the intervillous space, without a significant component of chronic villitis. Like MPVFD, it is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes and has an increased risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancies,49 and an explanatory comment is recommended when making this diagnosis. CHI has been associated with elevations in serum alkaline phosphatase50; this can be included in the comment if applicable. An infiltration of histiocytes within the intervillous space is also a feature of some infectious etiologies, including malaria and SARS-CoV-2.51-52 A diagnosis of CHI should not be rendered in these cases, as they may not have the same implications for recurrence. The specific infection should be diagnosed, if proven (see Specific Infections below), or suspicion for infection should be included in the comment.
Delayed villous maturation
Delayed villous maturation (DVM) is a lesion included in the Amsterdam consensus,2 and refers to a villous maturation appearance that is immature for gestational age. This is characterized by a monotonous appearance, reduced vasculosyncytial membranes, increased villous stroma, continuous cytotrophoblast layers and centrally placed capillaries.53 The Amsterdam consensus suggests a grading schema of focal (one full-thickness parenchymal slide only involved) versus diffuse (presence in two or more full thickness slides). The task force recognized that this lesion can be subjective and difficult to recognize, and also has some overlap with chorangiosis, and therefore the diagnosis should only be rendered if the pathologist is confident, and should largely be limited to placentas after 36 weeks gestation.
Villous dysmaturity
Villous dysmaturity is a related lesion to DVM. Multiple definitions and patterns have been described under this terminology, however for the purposes of this template, villous dysmaturity is defined as the pattern of delayed villous maturation with increased syncytial knots. This pattern, along with DVM, is associated with maternal diabetes and elevated body mass index (BMI).54-55 Given the multitude of possible interpretations of villous dysmaturity, it is recommended to include in the report which specific pattern is present, as well as an explanatory comment.
Intrauterine fetal demise
Placental pathology reports in cases of intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD) are some of the most carefully read and highly valued medical documents for both clinicians and patients. An explanatory comment should be included in all placentas received for IUFD, including if there are no placental findings to explain the cause of IUFD. Presence or absence of involutional changes should be mentioned in the report, as they may suggest the timing of the demise.56 Accurate distinction of IUFD changes from those seen in FVM can be challenging, but is important to achieve, as FVM is a not-infrequent cause of IUFD. While both conditions result in a cessation of fetal circulation, and therefore similar histologic changes, FVM demonstrates temporal and spatial heterogeneity as compared to IUFD.57 In FVM there will be variability in the degree of involutional changes across the placenta, with involvement of some areas and not others. In IUFD, since the loss of fetal circulation is a single event, there is relative uniformity in parenchymal involution across the entire placenta. In addition, fetal vascular thrombi or mural fibrin deposition, if present, are reliable indicators of the presence of FVM, even in the setting of IUFD.
Specific infections
A wide variety of infectious organisms can affect the placenta, via both ascending and hematogenous routes. Each should be reported in accordance with the specific organism identified, with an explanatory comment if special diagnostic testing was undertaken to demonstrate the organism. Common examples include Candida species, cytomegalovirus, and syphilis. Ascending bacterial infection should be described as acute chorioamnionitis as above. Placental infections, including some of the more common specific patterns of placental inflammation have been well-reviewed previously.19
Sickled red blood cells in intervillous space
Sickling of red blood cells in the intervillous space may be seen in placentas from mothers with sickle cell disease or sickle cell trait. While prenatal testing for hemoglobinopathy is increasingly common and is recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,58 a comment may be included in the pathology report and the clinician should be notified when this finding is noted to prompt appropriate work-up, if not already performed.59-60
Twins
While no specific verbiage or report structure is endorsed, certain elements are recommended for twin placentas. These include chorionicity, amnionicity, separate weights or estimation of placental share for dichorionic twin placentas, and the share of vascular territory for each twin, as well vascular anastomoses in monochorionic placentas.61 Although the format may vary by pathologist, it is recommended that the report clearly distinguish diagnoses relevant to each individual twin within the body of the report. While detailed reporting of vascular anastomoses with injection studies in monochorionic twin placentas can be technically challenging for general surgical pathology labs, at the minimum the presence or absence and number of anastomoses should be estimated based on gross examination. In otherwise uncomplicated cases, the level of detail may depend on the expertise or experience available within the laboratory. 
Normal
Depending on the indications used by a given institution for pathologic evaluation of the placenta, a variable percentage may have no gross or histologic abnormalities, even after careful pathologic examination. Of note, adequate sampling of the placenta, as outlined by the Amsterdam consensus2 is a prerequisite for this diagnosis. In these cases, the task force recommends including all recommended header elements, followed by a diagnostic line reflecting the lack of identifiable abnormalities. Depending on the indication for which the placenta was sent (such as intra-amniotic infection, abruption and suspicion for placenta accreta spectrum), other specific comments noting the lack of those findings may be warranted. 

Discussion
The Placental Pathology Reporting Task Force was established in response to the widespread recognition of suboptimal placental pathology reporting quality across the United States, as well as a movement within the patient advocacy community, particularly centered around stillbirth, to enhance the utility of placental pathology reports for both clinicians and patients. The task force was thoughtfully assembled and was uniquely positioned to advance reform in this aspect of the field, as it included a significant number of pathologists with expertise in placental pathology, who trained across diverse institutions and are currently practicing in both academic and private settings, along with representatives from obstetrics, neonatology, and patient advocacy groups. The Task Force recognizes that some subspecialized perinatal pathologists have published alternative reporting schemas4-6 or may wish to report additional detailed information beyond what is covered in the template developed by the Task Force.62 The group therefore emphasizes that adoption of the template does not preclude the use of other reporting metrics if desired by an individual pathologist or institution. Instead, it provides a straightforward, accessible minimum standard for all surgical pathology labs and pathologists, regardless of training background. All suggested and recommended comments in the template may be modified to fit individual cases and institutional preferences. In addition, the Task Force suggested that, at each institution, pathologists work with their clinical colleagues to develop a list of diagnoses that require communication with the obstetrician or neonatologist.63 With this template, and the Amsterdam consensus statement in hand, the general pathologist should be able to compose a comprehensive placental pathology report, that is useful and interpretable by both clinicians and patients.
       The group also acknowledged that there may be resistance to adopting the template, or even recognizing the overall importance of placental pathology reporting in general.64 To address this, an extensive educational initiative is planned for pathologists, to demonstrate appropriate use of the template, and for clinical care providers, to aid in interpretation and understanding of the resulting reports. 
       Another important aspect of the practice of placental pathology is that of turnaround time (TAT). Recognizing the limited capacity of busy surgical pathology labs to process what can at times be a large volume of placentas, the Task Force nevertheless recommends that placentas receive at least equivalent priority as other large surgical specimens, with a goal TAT of 3-4 days for most routine placentas, and 2 days for placentas from sick mothers or neonates.65 The importance of a reasonable TAT was particularly emphasized by the clinician members of the Task Force as a priority, since even a well-written pathology report has limited utility if it is not delivered promptly. There was dedicated weigh-in from our pediatric task force members, who provided recommendations for making the reporting system a more readily available and informative tool for clinicians treating critically ill newborn infants.  It was emphasized that several key features of the placental pathology report have significant potential to guide neonatal management and improve infant outcomes.
Finally, the Task Force members are aware of the ever evolving nature of this field. As further classification systems and definitions are published, and with emerging opportunities offered by digital pathology and artificial intelligence,66-68 the content of this template will require periodic updates as well. 



